**The strength of sexual signals predicts same-sex paring in termites**
**(\<3500 words)**

**Nobuaki Mizumoto**<sup>1,2,3\#\*</sup>**, Sang-Bin
Lee**<sup>4\#</sup>**, Thomas Chouvenc**<sup>4</sup>

1: Department of Entomology & Plant Pathology, Auburn, AL, USA

2: Evolutionary Genomics Unit, Okinawa Institute of Science & Technology
Graduate University, Onna-son, Okinawa, 904-0495, Japan

3: Computational Neuroethology Unit, Okinawa Institute of Science &
Technology Graduate University, Onna-son, Okinawa, 904-0495, Japan

4: Entomology and Nematology Department, Ft. Lauderdale Research and
Education Center, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences,
University of Florida, Ft. Lauderdale, FL 33314, USA

\#: These authors contributed equally.

\*: Correspondence: Nobuaki Mizumoto; <nzm0095@auburn.edu>

ORCID: NM: 0000-0002-6731-8684; SBL: 0000-0001-7982-0842; TC:
0000-0003-3154-2489

**Abstract**

Same-sex sexual behavior (SSB) is an enigma in behavioral ecology as it
does not result in reproduction. Proximately, the evolution of sexual
signals is critical for the evolution of SSB but in a sex-specific
manner. For signal receivers, the loss of sexual signals leads to
smaller sex differences, leading to frequent indiscriminate mating and
accidental SSB between receivers. Alternatively, for senders, sexual
signals could help locate another sender, enhancing intentional SSB as
in heterosexual pairing. Here, we demonstrate this ink between sex
pheromones and the frequency of same-sex pairing in two *Coptotermes*
termites that use the same chemical as sex pheromones but in different
quantities. In termites, mating pairs engage in tandem runs, where a
male follows a female that produces sex pheromones. We found that the
female-female tandem was more common in *C. formosanus* whose females
produce more pheromones, while male-male tandem was more common in *C.
gestroi*, whose females produce fewer pheromones. In *C. formosanus*,
female-female tandem was more common than male-male tandem, while both
tandems were equally observed in *C. gestroi*. Thus, stronger pheromones
lead to sender-sender SSB, while weaker pheromones lead to
receiver-receiver SSB. The proximate mechanism of SSB is diverse,
reflecting the heterosexual context.

**Keywords**: homosexual behavior, movement coordination, pheromone,
same-sex sexual behavior, social insects

**Introduction**

Same-sex sexual behavior (SSB) is widespread among diverse animals with
considerable variations across taxa \[1–3\]. In most species, the SSB is
considered the result of mistaken identity \[3,4\], while in some cases,
SSB provides adaptive value by making the best of a bad job with the
shortage of heterosexual partners \[5,6\]. In either case, the
occurrence of SSB is dependent on the mode of mating strategy in
heterosexual contexts and is strongly affected by the accuracy and
carefulness of sex identification of the mating partner \[7\]. Sexual
communication, which is mediated via sex-specific attracting signals
(e.g., sex pheromones), underlies such sexual identification of the
other sex. Therefore, even if the SSB does not have adaptive value, the
evolutionary patterns of sexual signals could shape the diversity of SSB
across species, as a by-product. However, the role of sex-specific
signals in SSB has remained unexplored.

As signal senders and receivers play different roles in mate pairing,
the effect of sexual signals on SSB should differ between sender-sender
pairs and receiver-receiver pairs. For example, the strength of sexual
signals has the opposite effect on the sender-sender SSB and
receiver-receiver SSB. In the species with weak sex-specific signals,
more frequent SSB between receivers is expected compared with the
species with strong signals \[8\]. With small sexual differences,
receivers can locate other receivers as well as senders, which may also
provoke mistaken identity of the sex of the partner. On the other hand,
more SSB between signal senders could be possible in the species with
strong signals. It is rarer to observe SSB between senders as they are
usually passive sex during mating \[9\]. But with strong signals, it is
easier for even senders to find other senders than other receivers.
Thus, the strength of sexual signals is expected to modify the relative
occurrence of receiver-receiver and sender-sender SSB across species.

Mate pairing in termites provides an ideal model system to study the
evolution of SSB. Termites form life-long monogamous pairs to establish
colonies \[10\]. During a brief period, alates (winged adults) disperse
from their nests. Both females and males land on the ground, shed their
wings, and run to search for a mating partner. Upon joining, a pair
performs a tandem run. In neoisopteran termites, the male always follows
the female with sex pheromones \[11\], maintaining contact in a highly
coordinated manner while seeking a suitable site for colony foundation.
Although tandem running often involves communication via sex pheromones,
same-sex tandem run can be observed in either sex \[11,12\]. Sex
pheromone should play different roles between female-female pairs and
male-male pairs. In male-male pairs, same-sex tandem can happen once one
male started to follow another male. Thus, SSB can happen because of
mistaken identity. This implies that species with weak sex pheromones
provoke male-male tandem pairing. On the other hand, female-female
tandem cannot happen because of mistaken identity. As the sex role is
fixed (females do not follow males) \[11,13\], female-female tandem runs
initiate after one female changed sex role in advance. In this
situation, sex pheromones of females rather facilitate same-sex tandems
because females can easily follow another female.

In this study, we compared the same-sex tandem running behavior in two
*Coptotermes* termites: *Coptotermes formosanus* Shiraki and
*Coptotermes gestroi* Wasmann. These two species share the same chemical
for sex pairing pheromones \[14\] and can form heterosexual tandem runs
\[15,16\]. However, the quantity of pheromones is different between
these two species, where *C. formosanus* has 10 times more pheromones
than *C. gestroi* \[14\]. Therefore, we predict that male-male tandem is
more frequent in *C. gestroi* than *C. formosanus*, while female-female
tandem is more frequent in *C. formosanus* than *C. gestroi*.
Furthermore, when a pair is separated during heterosexual tandem run,
females pause to wait for males, while males move around to search for
females in both species \[17,18\]. We tested if they can play a role of
different sex in same-sex tandem runs.

**Methods**

*Termites and experimental arena*

We collected alates using a light-trapping system at dusk between 27-29
March for *C. gestroi* and 21-22 April, 1-2 May for *C. formosanus* in
2021 in Broward County (Florida, USA) during synchronized dispersal
flights. All alates were collected at a single site. We brought the
alates to the laboratory and maintained them on wet cardboard at 28°C.
We used individuals who did not shed their wings by themselves to
prevent any prior experience of tandem runs. After inducing shedding
their wings, we observed their behaviors within 12 h. Each individual
was used only once.

We performed all observations in an experimental arena made by filling a
Petri dish (ø = 150 mm) with moistened plaster. The Petri dish had a
clear lid during observations. A video camera (XXX) above the arena was
adjusted so that the arena filled the camera frame. We introduced a pair
of termites into the arena. Each pair was recorded for 30 minutes in 30
frames per second (FPS). In total, we obtained 49, 61, and 44 videos for
female-male, female-female, and male-male in *C. formosanus*; and 40,
40, and 45 videos for female-male, female-female, and male-male in *C.
gestroi*. We extracted the coordinates of the centroids of termite
movements from all obtained video, using the video-tracking system
UMATracker \[19\]. We down sampled all coordinates to a rate of five FPS
for subsequent analyses. We measured the diameter of dish and body
length of two termites in pixel for each video, using a python program
(https://github.com/nobuaki-mzmt/cop\_homo\_tandem\_cf-vs-cg).

*Tandem analysis*

To compare the duration of tandem run between pair combinations and
species, we automatically determined that pairs were in tandem when the
distance between their centroids was within the sum of their body
length. This simplest threshold is used in a previous study \[20\], and
using other complex definitions (e.g., \[16–18\]) did not change the
conclusion. We did not count very short interactions (\< 5 seconds
within two body length) as tandem runs and small separation (\< 2
seconds) during tandem as interruptions.

To compare the duration of tandem runs between species and combinations,
we used mixed-effects Cox models \[coxme() function in the coxme package
in R \[21\]\], with pair combination (or species) treated as a fixed
effect and the ID of each video as a random effect. We compared the
durations between species for each combination (heterosexual,
female–female, or male–male) and among combinations for each species,
separately. We also compared the proportion of the total time spent
performing tandem runs across different pair combinations (or species),
after transforming proportional data using logit-transformation after
adding 0.01 to the observed proportions to avoid infinite values \[22\].
We used Welch t-test to compare them between species for each pair
combination, while one-way anova with Tukey’s HSD to compare among
combinations for each species. Finally, for each separation event, we
obtained the movement speed of both termites after 5 seconds of
separation and calculated the absolute difference of movement speed. We
compared the difference of movement speed using linear mixed-effects
models \[lmer() function in the lme4 package in R \[23\]\], as the same
approach with mixed-effect Cox model as above. All data analyses were
performed using R v4.3.0 \[24\], and source codes are available at
github (https://github.com/nobuaki-mzmt/cop\_homo\_tandem\_cf-vs-cg).

**Results**

The species difference of tandem running behavior depended on the
pairing combinations. In heterosexual pairing, *C. formosanus* showed
more stable tandems (coxed-model, Figure S1) and spent longer time for
tandem runs than *C. gestroi* (t-test, Figure 1). Note that this result
is contradicting with a pervious study that detected no significant
difference between these two species \[16\]. This contradiction is
discussed in the supplementary material although this is not the main
theme of this paper (Supplementary materials). Somewhat similar pattern
was observed in female-female pairing, where *C. formosanus* showed more
stable tandems than *C. gestroi* (coxed-model, Figure S1), without
difference in the time spent in tandem runs (t-test, Figure 1). On the
other hand, male-male pairing showed the opposite pattern, where *C.
gestroi* showed more stable tandems (coxed-model, Figure S1) and spent
longer time for tandem runs than *C. formosanus* (t-test, Figure 1). In
either species, same-sex pairing was much more unstable than
heterosexual pairing, with no difference between female-female pairs and
male-male pairs in *C. gestroi*, while larger difference between
female-female pairs and male-male pairs in *C. formosanus*.

![](media/image1.png)

> **Figure 1.** Comparison of the total time spent in tandem among
> pairing combinations and species. The sex attracting pheromone is
> visualized below, with female leader releasing it and *C. formosanus*
> having larger quantity than *C. gestroi*.

After separations, all combinations showed speed differences between
partners. As shown in previous studies, in heterosexual pairs, male
followers sped up while female leaders slowed down after separation to
enhance the probability of reunions (Figure 2). Similar movement
differences between partners were observed in same-sex pairings (Figure
2). However, the levels of difference between partners were smaller in
same-sex pairing, compared with heterosexual pairs both in *C.
formosanus* () and *C. gestroi* (). This could be because movement speed
of same-sex tandem run was slower than the heterosexual tandem runs (),
and individuals did not tend to slow down as heterosexual pairs.

![](media/image2.png)

> **Figure 2.** Movement speed of termites before and after separation.
> Separation timing was determined when the distances between partners
> were larger than the sum of their body length. Solid lines indicate a
> partner moved faster, while dashed lines slower. Lines and shaded
> regions indicate mean ± 95CI.

**Discussion**

We found an association between same-sex pairing behavior and sex
pheromone quantity in two termite species with shared chemicals. First,
female-female pairing was more stable in *C. formosanus*, the species
with larger quantity of sex pheromones, where females could use sex
pheromones to maintain stable movement coordination with the same-sex
individuals. Because females usually are leaders in *Coptotermes*
tandem, females need to play follower (male) roles before the initiation
of same-sex pairing \[11\]. In this situation, female-female pairing is
not a result of mistaken identity, rather could be adaptive response as
observed in *Reticulitermes* termites \[5,12\] or non-adaptive
consequence of genetic correlation (ref). On the other hand, male-male
pairing was more prominent in *C. gestroi*, the species with smaller
quantity of sex pheromones. Given that male-male tandems in observed
*Coptotermes* termites are unstable and ephemeral, male-male tandem runs
of these species could be caused by mistaken identity, and *C. gestroi*
more frequently mis-identified the partner’s sex due to smaller sexual
dimorphism. In either way, our study clearly demonstrated that the
evolution of SSB is inseparable from the evolution of sex attracting
signals.

All of the previous studies on same-sex tandem runs in termites have
focused on *Reticulitermes* termites \[11,12,25\]. In *Reticulitermes*
termites, same-sex pairing functions by providing survival benefits
\[5,12,26\] and is not result of mistaken identity \[11\]. However, our
study illustrates the distinct pattern in *Coptotermes* termites, where
same-sex tandem in *Coptotermes* termites is rather accidental. First,
in *Reticulitermes* termites, same-sex tandem pairs were as stable as
heterosexual tandem pairs, and irregular partners behave like the other
sex upon separation \[11\]. In *Coptotermes* termites, on the other
hand, even once they form a same-sex tandem pair, either female-female
and male-male tandems were far less stable than heterosexual tandems
(Fig. 1 S1). Moving speed was also slower in same-sex tandems than
heterosexual pairs. Furthermore, upon separation, movement dimorphisms
between partners, a key for efficient reunion, was not as strong as
heterosexual pairs (Fig. 2). These all indicate that *Coptotermes*
termites do not adjust their movement patterns to maintain same-sex
tandems. Therefore, we conclude that same-sex tandem in *Coptotermes*
termites is less functional than *Reticulitermes* termites.

Even though the same-sex pairing of *Coptotermes* termites is not
adaptive, our study on their interspecific variations shows the
mechanical aspects for the evolution of the diversity in SSB.

In summary,

**Data accessibility**

All data and source codes for analyzing them are available at Github:
<https://github.com/nobuaki-mzmt/cop_homo_tandem_cf-vs-cg>., and the
accepted version will be deposited at Zenodo.

**Authors’ contributions**

NM: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Data curation,
Writing – original draft

SBL: Methodology, Investigation, Data curation, Writing – review &
editing

TC: Resources, Writing – review & editing

**Competing interests**

The authors declare no competing interest.

**Acknowledgments**

We thank Aoi Mizumoto for assistance during the video analysis. This
work was supported by two JSPS Research Fellowships for Young
Scientists, CPD, to NM (20J00660), Grant-in-Aid for Early-Career
Scientists (21K15168) to NM, and an IPSF fellowship from OIST to N.M.

**References**

1\. Bagemihl B. 1999 *Biological exuberance: Animal homosexuality and
natural diversity*. New York: NY: St. Martins’ Press. See
https://scholar.google.co.jp/scholar?q=Biological+Exuberance:+Animal+Homosexuality+and+Natural+Diversity+\&hl=ja\&as\_sdt=0,5\#0.2.
Bailey NW, Zuk M. 2009 Same-sex sexual behavior and evolution. *Trends
in Ecology & Evolution* **24**, 439–446.
(doi:10.1016/j.tree.2009.03.014)3. Scharf I, Martin OY. 2013 Same-sex
sexual behavior in insects and arachnids: prevalence, causes, and
consequences. *Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology* **67**, 1719–1730.
(doi:10.1007/s00265-013-1610-x)4. Monk JD, Giglio E, Kamath A, Lambert
MR, McDonough CE. 2019 An alternative hypothesis for the evolution of
same-sex sexual behaviour in animals. *Nature Ecology and Evolution*
**3**, 1622–1631. (doi:10.1038/s41559-019-1019-7)5. Mizumoto N, Yashiro
T, Matsuura K. 2016 Male same-sex pairing as an adaptive strategy for
future reproduction in termites. *Animal Behaviour* **119**, 179–187.
(doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2016.07.007)6. Young LC, VanderWerf EA. 2013
Adaptive value of same-sex pairing in Laysan albatross. *Proceedings of
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences* **281**.
(doi:10.1098/rspb.2013.2473)7. Lerch BA, Servedio MR. 2021 Same-sex
sexual behaviour and selection for indiscriminate mating. *Nature
Ecology and Evolution* **5**, 135–141.
(doi:10.1038/s41559-020-01331-w)8. Pfau D, Jordan CL, Breedlove SM. 2021
The de-scent of sexuality: Did loss of a pheromone signaling protein
permit the evolution of same-sex sexual behavior in primates? *Archives
of Sexual Behavior* **50**, 2267–2276. (doi:10.1007/s10508-018-1377-2)9.
Burgevin L, Friberg U, Maklakov AA. 2013 Intersexual correlation for
same-sex sexual behaviour in an insect. *Animal Behaviour* **85**,
759–762. (doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2013.01.017)10. Nutting WL. 1969 8
Flight and colony foundation. In *Biology of termites* (eds K Krishna,
FM Weesner), pp. 233–282. New York: Academic Press.
(doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-395529-6.50012-X)11. Mizumoto N, Bourguignon T,
Bailey NW. 2022 Ancestral sex-role plasticity facilitates the evolution
of same-sex sexual behavior. *Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America* **119**, e2212401119.
(doi:10.1073/pnas.2212401119)12. Matsuura K, Kuno E, Nishida T. 2002
Homosexual tandem running as selfish herd in *Reticulitermes speratus*:
novel antipredatory behavior in termites. *Journal of theoretical
biology* **214**, 63–70.
(doi:https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.20.496918)13. Park YI, Bland JM,
Raina AK. 2004 Factors affecting post-flight behavior in primary
reproductives of the Formosan subterranean termite, Coptotermes
formosanus (Isoptera: Rhinotermitidae). *Journal of Insect Physiology*
**50**, 539–546. (doi:10.1016/j.jinsphys.2004.03.010)14. Chouvenc T,
Sillam-Dussès D, Robert A. 2020 Courtship behavior confusion in two
subterranean termite species that evolved in allopatry (Blattodea,
Rhinotermitidae, *Coptotermes*). *Journal of Chemical Ecology* , 1–14.
(doi:10.1007/s10886-020-01178-2)15. Chouvenc T, Helmick EE, Su N-Y. 2015
Hybridization of two major termite invaders as a consequence of human
activity. *PLoS ONE* **10**, e0120745.
(doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0120745)16. Mizumoto N, Lee SB, Valentini G,
Chouvenc T, Pratt SC. 2021 Coordination of movement via complementary
interactions of leaders and followers in termite mating pairs.
*Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences* **288**,
20210998. (doi:10.1098/rspb.2021.0998)17. Mizumoto N, Dobata S. 2019
Adaptive switch to sexually dimorphic movements by partner-seeking
termites. *Science Advances* **5**, eaau6108.
(doi:10.1126/sciadv.aau6108)18. Mizumoto N, Rizo A, Pratt SC, Chouvenc
T. 2020 Termite males enhance mating encounters by changing speed
according to density. *Journal of Animal Ecology* **89**, 2542–2552.
(doi:10.1111/1365-2656.13320)19. Yamanaka O, Takeuchi R. 2018
UMATracker: An intuitive image-based tracking platform. *Journal of
Experimental Biology* **221**, 1–24. (doi:10.1242/jeb.182469)20.
Valentini G, Mizumoto N, Pratt SC, Pavlic TP, Walker SI. 2020 Revealing
the structure of information flows discriminates similar animal social
behaviors. *eLife* **9**, e55395. (doi:10.7554/eLife.55395)21. Therneau
TM. 2015 coxme: mixed effects Cox models. 22. Warton DI, Hui FKC. 2011
The arcsine is asinine: The analysis of proportions in ecology.
*Ecology* **92**, 3–10. (doi:10.1890/10-0340.1)23. Bates D, Mächler M,
Bolker BM, Walker SC. 2015 Fitting linear mixed-effects models using
lme4. *Journal of Statistical Software* **67**.
(doi:10.18637/jss.v067.i01)24. R Core Team. 2023 R: A language and
environment for statistical computing. 25. Li G, Zou X, Lei C, Huang Q.
2013 Antipredator behavior produced by heterosexual and homosexual
tandem running in the termite *Reticulitermes chinensis* (Isoptera:
Rhinotermitidae). *Sociobiology* **60**, 198–203. (doi:DOI:
10.13102/sociobiology.v60i2.198-203)26. Matsuura K, Fujimoto M, Goka K.
2004 Sexual and asexual colony foundation and the mechanism of
facultative parthenogenesis in the termite Reticulitermes speratus
(Isoptera, Rhinotermitidae). *Insectes Sociaux* **51**, 325–332.
(doi:10.1007/s00040-004-0746-0)

**  
**

Supplementary material for

**The strength of sexual signals predicts same-sex paring in termites**

**Nobuaki Mizumoto, Sang-Bin Lee, Thomas Chouvenc**

\*. Author correspondence: <nzm0095@auburn.edu>

This file includes:

Figure S1

![A graph of two people Description automatically
generated](media/image3.png)

> **Figure S1.** Comparison of the duration of tandem running until
> separation across different pairing combinations and species.
> Kaplan–Meier survival curves were generated for each pairing
> combination. The marks for censored data are not shown. Shaded regions
> show 95% confidence intervals.
